Add README.md (#156)
Firmwehr/gentle: README.md

We ended up third place, which is right in the middle and was probably due to gentle being very robust, winning simply
by default, for generating working binaries, where other compilers failed.

Despite that, we had lots of fun working on this project and really learned a lot about compilers. We had to invest
quite a lot of time, probably than you would in other courses, but who cares if you enjoy it? It's probably not advised
to take this course if you are not interested and just want to get easy credits.

As this repository demonstrates, we also went ham with the CI pipeline, creating multiple tests and unnecessary tools to
save a few hours in total, that we never got back. On of which is [Flammenwehrfer](https://github.com/Flammenwehrfer),
our cross-repository test bot, that would run all tests from our shared test framework against every groups current
compiler, informing them if a test case broken their compiler.

# FAQ
The following section serves to answer what we believe to be common questions one might have, especially if you are a
fellow student and consider taking this course.

## What Language does it compile? Is it a real compiler?

> gentle is able to compile *Mini-Java*. Mini-Java is a subset of Java (technically it contains programs which would be

Reviewer: Gentle ist noch klein geschrieben?

> gentle is able to compile *Mini-Java*. Mini-Java is a subset of Java (technically it contains programs which would be

Author: Ich dachte wir würden ihn überall klein schreiben, hatte nicht gesehen, dass er überall groß geschrieben wurden.

> gentle is able to compile *Mini-Java*. Mini-Java is a subset of Java (technically it contains programs which would be

Reviewer: Am Satzsanfang wäre das schon sinnvoll, ansonsten kann gentle auch gerne klein sein

invalid in Java due to some edge cases). The language has been purposfully modified to reduce the scope of supported
language features while maintaining all essential control primitives. You might have realized that this results in a
very clunky to use language and you are correct. However the goal of this course was not in fact to engineer a good
language but focus on the optimizations and code generation. Here is a quick summary of most of Mini-Java's key aspects.

* mostly subset of Java
* no dynamic binding / interfaces / vtables
* only one input file
* **very** basic IO (only able to read and write to/from `stdin/stdout`)
* no memory managment, memory will never be `free`-ed
* no constructors / no overloading / no visibility modifiers (or any modifiers)

> * no static variables, `public static void main(String[])` is only static method (and kept to stay mostly compatible

Reviewer 2: is the only static method and is kept to remain compatible with Java

<div align="center">
  <h1>Gentle</h1>
</div>

Gentle is a compiler for a Java subset called "MiniJava" and was developed during the
2021/22 [compiler construction course](https://pp.info.uni-karlsruhe.de/lehre/WS202122/compprakt/)
at [Karlsruher Institut für Technologie](https://www.kit.edu/).
In this course, students implement a fully-functional compiler from the ground
up. Gentle is comprised of
- a simple string-based lexer
- a recursive-descent parser utilizing precedence climbing for expressions

>   and building an abstract syntax tree

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  that builds an abstract syntax tree
```

> - a semantic analysis and conversion step, attributing our AST, enriching it
>   with e.g. type information and ensuring programs are semantically valid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a semantic analysis and conversion step that ensures the program is
  semantically valid and attributes the AST with type information
```

- a conversion into the [libFirm](https://pp.ipd.kit.edu/firm/) SSA-based
  intermediate representation (IR)
- many optimizations operating on the libFirm IR

> - a backend step lowering the libFirm IR to our own Ikea-IR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a backend step lowering the libFirm IR to our own Ikea IR
```

- a final step generating x86-64 assembly
- invoking gcc to assemble and link the output with our custom runtime

## Intermediate Representations
As mentioned above, our compiler makes heavy use of the FIRM intermediate
representation using [libFirm](https://libfirm.github.io/). Firm is a
graph-based intermediate representation in

> [SSA form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single_assignment_form) and
> libFirm offers a C99 frontend (`cparser`) and can output optimized assembly for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[SSA form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single_assignment_form).
LibFirm offers a C99 frontend (`cparser`) and can output optimized assembly for
```

multiple architectures, including x86 (32/64 bit), RISC-V 32, MIPS and a few
more.

We weren't allowed to use many of the conveniences and analysis results libFirm
computes, so our compiler only depends on the graph structure, the initial

> insertion of Phis to build up a proper SSA structure and dominance to properly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
insertion of phis to build up a proper SSA structure and dominance to properly
```
Nicht sicher

implement global value numbering.

## Integrating libFirm

> libFirm is written in C and must therefore be called using JNI - the Java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LibFirm is written in C and must therefore be called using JNI - the Java
```

As you can't effectively build a compiler with 20 people working all over each
other, we were split in groups of four to five students. Each group created
their own compiler for the same MiniJava language, but the approaches,
workflows and even programming languages varied considerably.

Our group consisted of [@Chrisliebaer](https://github.com/chrisliebaer),
[@Garmelon](https://github.com/Garmelon),
[@I-Al-Istannen](https://github.com/I-Al-Istannen),
[@pbrinkmeier](https://github.com/pbrinkmeier) and
[@SirYWell](https://github.com/SirYwell).

# Getting started
The easiest way to get started is using the `build` and `run` scripts in the
root directory. These scripts are used by CI and also the benchmark and testing
suite - they should work out of the box.

Additionally, we also provide a docker image built with
[jib](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib) which is automatically
pushed to the GitHub Container Registry. You can find it
[here](https://github.com/Firmwehr/gentle/pkgs/container/gentle).

Finally, if you are familiar with Gradle, you can also directly build gentle using it.
The `build` script is just a thin wrapper around `distInstall`.

# Features

> Gentle supports every feature MiniJava has to offer, but you will have to live

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gentle supports every feature MiniJava has to offer, meaning you will have to live
```

without some conveniences. Notably, MiniJava does not contain any
object-oriented features like inheritance or some basic concepts like
`for`-loops or a `String` type. This doesn't stop you from writing proper
programs in it though! Our team produced a working from-scratch

> re-implementation of the classic AsciiQuarium as well as a fully-functional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
re-implementation of the classic asciiquarium as well as a fully-functional
```
consistency

Currently, gentle implements the following optimizations:
* **Algebraic identities** (distributive, associative, additive/multiplicative
  identities and many more)
* **Boolean optimizations** (e.g. elimination of unnecessary jumps)
* **Escape analysis** (able to completely omit allocating objects or statically
  accessed arrays)
* **Global Value Numbering** (a form of common subexpression elimination)
* **Constant folding (this one was required)** (computes constant expressions
  at compile-time)
* **Control Flow Optimizations** (e.g. omit unnecessary jumps, merge blocks
  where possible, …)
* **Loop-invariant code motion** (move computations outside of loops if they
  don't depend on the iteration)
* **Method Inlining** (essentially copy-paste one method into all callsites)
* **Pure Function Analysis** (e.g. deduplicate calls to pure functions or omit
  calling them if the result is never used)
* **Strength Reduction** (e.g. convert costly divisions and multiplications
  into bit shifts)
* **Unused Parameter Elimination** (remove parameters from methods if they are
  never used)

# Summary
To spice up the course a bit a competition was held and a prize awarded for the

> compiler producing the fastest (and correct of course!) binaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compiler producing the fastest correct binaries.
```

Gentle has quite a few interesting optimizations but some major parts, like
load-store optimizations and especially register allocation, weren't finished in
time.

Despite this we had lots of fun working on the project and learned a lot about

> how compilers work and why they do(n't do) certain things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
how compilers work and why they (don't) do certain things.
```

Learning this on our own time and happily cooking up weird optimizations beyond
what was needed took up considerable time though and far exceeded what the
course credits suggest.
If you are interested in compilers and have fun hacking away on one, the course
is still a good choice :)

As our team consisted of quite a few people with an interest in modern software
development practices, we also went ham with our CI pipeline and static

> analysis tools, resulting in a quite robust and stable compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
analysis tools, resulting in quite a robust and stable compiler.
```

During the course we integrated Qodana, wrote a Github Action to interpret its
output, created a docker image, standardized on a development workflow with
mandatory code review and also wrote
[Flammenwehrfer](https://github.com/Flammenwehrfer) while we were at it.
Flammenwehrfer is our cross-repository test bot, runing all tests from our
shared test framework against the compilers of every group, opening and closing

> github issues depending on how well their compiler coped with new tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other teams' GitHub issues depending on how well their compiler coped with new tests.
```

Not yet satisfied with the existential dread we caused, we continued on and

> wrote an annotation processor parsing Ascii-Art program graphs and emitting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wrote an annotation processor parsing ascii art program graphs and emitting
```

type-safe tree matching code we could use from java.

# FAQ
The following section serves to answer what we believe to be common questions,
especially if you are a fellow student and consider taking this course.

## What language does it compile? Is it a real compiler?
Gentle is able to compile *Mini-Java*. Mini-Java is a subset of Java - technically it contains programs which would be

> invalid in Java due to some edge cases).
> The language has been purposfully modified to reduce the scope of supported
> language features while maintaining all essential control primitives.
> It completly elides polymorphism, for a start, but also simpler things like for loops:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
invalid in Java due to some edge cases.
The language has been purposefully modified to reduce the scope of supported
language features while maintaining all essential control primitives.
It completely elides polymorphism, for a start, but also simpler things like for loops:
```

there exist projects that do just that (e.g. Oracle's `graal` native-image).

## This sounds really complicated, how did you not get overwhelmed?
Quite simple: Don't make mistakes, duh.
(If you do, blame someone else! The last person to have merged code into
`master` is a good candidate to start with. If it was you or you reviewed it,
blame the person who wrote the failing test. Resort to
[git-blame-someone-else](https://github.com/jayphelps/git-blame-someone-else)
if necessary.)

Part of the assignment was to contribute test cases to a common pool, shared by all groups.
This ensured a solid foundation of test cases existed.
However, as we later learned, our collection of tests turned out to be very lackluster.
It failed to spot quite a lot of very basic bugs, forcing us to rely on our mentors to report bugs in our weekly meetings.
They could fall back on the combined test suite of all the years before us,
allowing them to uncover bugs a lot more efficiently.

Towards the end of the project we started using
[jazzer](https://github.com/CodeIntelligenceTesting/jazzer) which was
eye-opening: It found a bug we were stumped on for a week in a few minutes and

> continued to produce bugs crashing our compiler, the compiler of other groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
continued to produce bugs crashing our compiler, the compilers of other groups
```

compiler producing the fastest (and correct of course!) binaries.
Gentle has quite a few interesting optimizations but some major parts, like
load-store optimizations and especially register allocation, weren't finished in
time.

Despite this we had lots of fun working on the project and learned a lot about
how compilers work and why they do(n't do) certain things.
Learning this on our own time and happily cooking up weird optimizations beyond
what was needed took up considerable time though and far exceeded what the
course credits suggest.
If you are interested in compilers and have fun hacking away on one, the course
is still a good choice :)

As our team consisted of quite a few people with an interest in modern software
development practices, we also went ham with our CI pipeline and static
analysis tools, resulting in a quite robust and stable compiler.
During the course we integrated Qodana, wrote a Github Action to interpret its
output, created a docker image, standardized on a development workflow with
mandatory code review and also wrote
[Flammenwehrfer](https://github.com/Flammenwehrfer) while we were at it.

> Flammenwehrfer is our cross-repository test bot, runing all tests from our

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Flammenwehrfer is our cross-repository test bot, running all tests from our
```

shared test framework against the compilers of every group, opening and closing
github issues depending on how well their compiler coped with new tests.
Not yet satisfied with the existential dread we caused, we continued on and
wrote an annotation processor parsing Ascii-Art program graphs and emitting
type-safe tree matching code we could use from java.

# FAQ
The following section serves to answer what we believe to be common questions,
especially if you are a fellow student and consider taking this course.

## What language does it compile? Is it a real compiler?
gentle is able to compile *Mini-Java*. Mini-Java is a subset of Java (technically it contains programs which would be
invalid in Java due to some edge cases).
The language has been purposfully modified to reduce the scope of supported
language features while maintaining all essential control primitives.
It completly elides polymorphism, for a start, but also simpler things like for loops:
After all, a `while` statement is perfectly sufficient!
You might suspect that writing programs in MiniJava would be extremely tedious as a result and no sane person would try to write code in it.

> This isn't wrong, but as you might have notices by now we are *far* from sane.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This isn't wrong, but as you might have noticed by now we are *far* from sane.
```
